What do we call the fact that God the Son became man?
The Incarnation

What did Jesus tell us to seek first?
The kingdom of God

What false image did the people worship while they waited impatiently for Moses to return from the mountain?
The golden calf

What allows us to see Jesus present in the Eucharist?
Our faith

What is the most important action of Baptism?
The immersion in or pouring of water

What is an example of prejudice?
Treating others unfairly because they are from another country or speak another language.

How did the apostles give the gift of the Holy Spirit to the newly baptized?
By the laying of hands

What amazed Jesus about the Roman centurion who asked Jesus to heal his child?
His great faith

What does "fear of the Lord" mean?
Being reverent towards God

Who created the world?
God, the Father

Who baptized Jesus?
John the Baptist

What is the term that describes the three persons as one God?
The Trinity

What caused Elijah to hide his face from God?
A tiny whispering sound

What began with the Protestant Reformation and is a form of Christianity?
Protestantism

What is meant by Jesus giving his whole life to save us?
That we will one day live with Him in heaven

How is prayer best described?
A personal relationship or friendship with God

What is the Immaculate Conception?
Mary being born without sin

Who makes up the Magisterium?
The pope and the bishops in communion with him

What is the Central Mystery of our Faith?
The Holy Trinity

What town did Jesus grow up in?
Nazareth

The Holy Spirit descended upon Jesus' followers on the day of Pentecost. The day is known as what in the Church?
The birthday of the Church

Who is the model for all Christians?
Mary, the Blessed Mother

When Adam and Eve disobeyed God, He made them leave. What is the name of the place they left?
The Garden of Eden

What is Jesus' foster father's name?
Joseph

How many days after Jesus was crucified did He rise from the dead?
Three

Who is Jesus' grandmother?
St. Anne

What is the work of the whole Church, celebrant, all the people, with Jesus Christ as the Head?
The Liturgy

What do we call the union of all those already in Heaven, those who are in Purgatory, and all those here on earth trying to live according to God's ways?
The Communion of Saints

Who is the Promised One?
Jesus

The Acts of the Apostles is Part Two of what Gospel?
Luke

In early biblical times, priests offered the blood of animals for worship. What does Jesus offer for sacrifice?
His own blood

What are the two main parts of the Bible?
The Old Testament and the New Testament

What Gospel begins by saying that the Word of God existed before Jesus was born in Bethlehem?
John

What do we call the free giving of food, money, and clothing to the poor?
Almsgiving

Luke's Gospel is the first part about salvation through Jesus, what is the second part?
Acts of the Apostles

Why was Cain upset with his brother Abel?
Cain was jealous because he thought that God favored Abel

What is an essential aspect of our getting to know the Bible?
That its message affects the way we live our daily lives

Which mark of the Church indicates its mission to all peoples?
Catholic

What biblical image describes that we have spiritual life only if we are united to Christ?
The vine and the branches

Who was one of the 7 men chosen to be deacons and then was the first one to be stoned to death for faith in Jesus?
Stephen

Why did the Pharisees question Jesus for curing the man with a withered hand?
It was done on the Sabbath

Who suggested the idea to deceive Isaac and even helped Jacob seek his father's blessing and inheritance?
Rebecca

What is the sacrament that increases and deepens our baptismal grace and calls us to spread and defend our faith in word and action?
Confirmation

What is the key message of all the prophets?
Repentance and reform

When Jesus got angry with Peter, what did he say?
"Get behind me, Satan."

How did Ezekiel first receive the word of God?
By eating a scroll God gave him

What was the penalty for working on the Sabbath during Moses' time?
Death

When did Jesus say to his disciples, "why are you terrified, oh you of little faith?"
At the calming of the sea

To whom did God give special understanding of visions and dreams during the Babylonian exile?
Daniel

The date for Ash Wednesday for each year depends on what feast?
Date for Easter Sunday

Who blesses the Chrism Oil used for Confirmation?
The Bishop

What happened at the Last Supper?
Jesus washed the feet of his apostles on the evening before his death; he instituted the Eucharist, and founded the priesthood of the New Covenant

According to Jesus in Matthew 24:35, what will never pass away?
God's words will never pass away.

According to Proverbs 10:1, what makes a parent glad?
A wise child.

Who tempts us to do evil?
Satan and the other devils

By the grace of Baptism "in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit" what are we called to?
To share in the life of the Blessed Trinity both here on earth and after death.

What is the word used to refer to God making Himself known to us?
Revelation

It was in the context of this celebration that Jesus gave us Himself in Holy Communion for the first time?
Passover

Luke's Gospel is the first part about salvation through Jesus, what is the second part?
Acts of the Apostles

According to Matthew, where did Jesus teach the people and proclaim the kingdom of God?
In the synagogues

Which Mystery of the Rosary is about Jesus giving Peter, James, and John a glimpse of heaven?
The Transfiguration

What marks the beginning of salvation history?
Creation

What is the name of the day at the end of the world where Christ will come in glory to judge the living and the dead?
Judgment Day

Name two Corporal Works of Mercy.
Feed the hungry; give drink to the thirsty; clothe the naked; visit the imprisoned; shelter the homeless; visit the sick; bury the dead

What is the name for the unbroken chain of authority that extends from the apostles to the bishops of today?
Apostolic Succession

What is the largest single denomination in Christianity?
Catholic

What is the last book of the Old Testament?
Malachi

Who is the Bishop of Rome?
The Pope

What is the book of laws used by the Church called?
Canon Law

In what season of the liturgical year do we reflect on the people in the Old Testament who waited so long for the Promised Messiah?
Advent

When lit, what does the sanctuary lamp indicate?
The Blessed Sacrament is in the Tabernacle

What do we call that part of the Mass in which we offer prayers for the needs of the Church, civil leaders, the sick and the dead?
Prayer of the Faithful or General Intercessions

Name 3 of the 7 themes of Catholic Social Teaching?
Life and dignity of the human person; the call to family, community and participation; rights and responsibilities of the human person; option for the poor and vulnerable; dignity of work and the right of workers; solidarity of the human family; care for God's creation

What is the action done by the priest at Mass which expresses the reunion of Christ's body and blood in his resurrection which had been separated in his death?
Breaking of a piece of the Consecrated Host, then mingled with the Precious Blood in the chalice

Who is the Mohawk Indian, born in Auriesville, NY, baptized at the age of 20 and died at the age of 24. Her decision to become Catholic Christian angered her tribe. She suffered much for her faith.
St. Kateri Tekakwitha

What gives the priest the authority to forgive sins in confession?
The sacrament of Holy Orders

What do we call what the apostles told about what Jesus said and did?
Oral tradition

What image did Jesus use to describe the kingdom of God as the smallest of seeds which grow into a large plant?
A mustard seed

Who said to Jesus, "Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man?"
Simon Peter

According to Luke, where did the Ascension of Jesus take place?
At Bethany

To whom did God give special understanding of visions and dreams during the Babylonian exile?
Daniel

What musical instrument did Joshua tell the priest to use to crack the walls of Jericho?
Horns

Name two of the four main parts of the Mass.
The Introductory Rites, the Liturgy of the Word, the Liturgy of the Eucharist and the Concluding rites

How many days is the liturgical season of Easter?
Fifty

What do we call the area in the Church where the altar is placed?
The Sanctuary

What do we call the cycle of seasons and feasts celebrating Christ with us always?
Liturgical year

What do we call the official process that certifies sainthood?
Canonization

What do we call a person who denies the existence of God?
Atheist

You really want and wish you had your best friend's bike. What Commandment refers to this?
The 10th; you shall not covet your neighbor's goods

What do we call the theological virtue that allows us to trust in Christ's promises of salvation?
Hope

Who has spoken through the prophets?
The Holy Spirit

What is the source of our forgiveness and our salvation?
The death and resurrection of Jesus

What do we call a consecrated religious woman whose ministry commits them to silence, contemplation, and prayer?
A Nun

Who wears the fisherman's ring?
The Pope

According to Luke, what did the women find at the tomb when they came to anoint the body of Jesus?
Two men dressed in dazzling clothes

How did Mary (Lazarus' sister) show her deep love for Jesus?
She anointed His feet with very expensive oil. (John 12:1-8)

How many books make up the Old Testament?
46

Why is Mary the model for all Christians?
Because she always did God's will with faith and trust

Who were the first to witness the birth of Jesus?
The Shepherds

"The power to act or not to act" is called...?
Freedom

The ministry of which New Testament figure is highlighted during the season of Advent?
John the Baptist

Through which special prayer die Jesus teach us to ask forgiveness?
The Our Father

Where did Jesus pray "Let this cup pass from me?"
At Gethsemani

Holy Week begins with _____
Jesus' entry into Jerusalem

Religious statues, medals and holy water are examples of things called ____
Sacramentals

What parable answers the questions, "Who is my neighbor?"
The Good Samaritan

Michael the archangel announced the birth of Jesus to Mary. True or False?
False

What is the public prayer of the whole Catholic Church?
The Mass

Who built the first temple or house of prayer in Jerusalem?
Solomon

Wisdom says that God made all things by his ____
Word

On what day did God create the birds?
The fifth day

Which book of the Bible is a dramatic poem dealing with the suffering of the innocent?
The Book of Job

Did Elizabeth give birth to her son before Mary gave birth to Jesus?
True

Who was healed by touching Jesus' cloak?
The woman in hemorrhage

How did Abraham act when he received God's call?
He was submissive.

What did God tell Moses that his name was?
"I Am who Am"

Usually there are how many Stations of the Cross?
Fourteen

The Church celebrates its birthday on
Pentecost

What should we do before asking God for anything?
Seek forgiveness

The longest season of the Church year is _____
Ordinary Time

What must be present for the Liturgy to bear fruit in our lives?
Faith and Conversion

Whom did King David have killed in order to steal away the man's wife?
Uriah

How does Jesus show that he forgives sinners?
By receiving sinners at table

According to Luke where did Jesus go after his baptism?
To the desert

Which is not one of the original twelve apostles... James, Luke or Thomas?
Luke

When did Jesus say to his disciples, "Why are you terrified, O you of little faith?"
At the calming of the sea

Why did the Pharisees question Jesus for curing the man with a withered hand?
It was done on the Sabbath

Whose faith amazed Jesus more than anyone else in Israel?
The Centurion

Which sacrament completes the rite of Christian initiation?
Eucharist

Which part of the Mass explains the Gospel in terms of living in today's world?
The Homily

In what religion does Christianity have its roots?
Judaism

Only the saints in heaven can be holy. True or false.
False

Which liturgical season recalls the time when Jesus was tempted by the devil in the desert?
Lent

Which Old Testament person spoke with God "face to face"?
Moses

What will be revealed at the last judgment?
God's final victory over injustice and death

Which virtue helps us enjoy the good things in life without becoming slaves to them?
Temperance

In marriage, what symbolizes faithfulness?
The ring

Which of these is NOT a solemn vow of a religious priest, brother or sister: obedience, poverty or humility?
Humility

What sin results from a person desiring the good of another?
Envy

Which Jewish festival is celebrated near the time that Christians celebrate the death and resurrection of Jesus?
Passover

A bad habit that leads us away from Christian happiness is called
A vice

What does it mean to dress discreetly for Mass?
To dress modestly

What is the purpose of religious objects like medals, holy cards or statues?
To remind us of God's presence

What does "Kyrie Eleison" mean?
Lord, have mercy.

What does not have a beginning or an end?
God

Who teaches the Church and recalls for her everything that Jesus said?
The Holy Spirit

What kind of angel protects and guides us?
Our guardian angel

Who must not receive the Eucharist without going to confession?
Those conscious of grave sin

What helps us to discern and act according to the will of God?
Personal prayer

Name the characteristic of the Church that describes her connection to the apostles and their mission.
The Church is Apostolic

What is another name for the Divine Office?
The liturgy of the Hours

What do we call the clear summary statement of our belief as Catholics?
The Creed

What is the sin of adultery?
Being unfaithful to one's spouse in marriage

Name 2 of the Precepts of the Church?
Observe the prescribed days of fast and abstinence; attend Mass on Sunday or Saturday evening and Holy days of Obligation; confess one's sins at least once a year; receive Holy Eucharist at least once during the Easter season; provide for the material needs of the Church and emphasize the meaning of charity

What is the name of the large ring that the Bishop wears?
Episcopal ring

What is another word for sharing the good news of Jesus with others?
Evangelizing

What is the symbol that represents our redemption as Christians?
The Cross

According to the New Testament, when does the Holy Spirit first appear visibly in Jesus' life?
At Jesus' baptism

The virtue of hope does what?
Keeps us from discouragement and sustains us in times of trouble.

What happened when the apostles laid hands upon people who believed in Jesus?
They received the Holy Spirit.

Relying on magic, such as astrology and tarot cards for spiritual or physical benefits is against which commandment?
The first commandment: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me."

What is the Canticle of Mary?
The Magnificat

To whom does God choose to show "his faithfulness to his promises?"
The powerless and the weak

What are the two sources of divine revelation?
Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition

What is the meaning in the Apostles Creed of the words, "he descended into hell"?
After Jesus died on the cross, he went to gather all those who had died and had lived good lives to now be able to share with him eternal happiness in heaven.

What is the name of the inner voice that tells us what is good and what is evil?
Conscience

Name 2 of the Four Cardinal Virtues.
Prudence; Justice; Fortitude; Temperance

In what sacrament do we receive spiritual help to overcome our sins, weaknesses and failures?
Reconciliation/Penance

What prophet told God he was too young to do what God was asking of him?
Jeremiah

What do we call the stories that Jesus told to teach a special lesson or meaning?
Parables

What do we call one of the oldest forms of praying with Scripture?
Lectio Divina

What was a beautiful chest containing the Tablets of the Ten Commandments in the Old Testament called?
Ark of the Covenant

What is the meaning of adding of a few drops of water to the wine in the chalice just before the Consecration?
The wine symbolizes Christ's divinity and the water symbolizes our humanity. We share in Christ's divine life.

What symbolizes baptism in the story of Noah?
The flood waters

What changed the apostles from being fearful about carrying out the mission that Jesus left for them before He returned to His Father in Heaven?
The coming of the Holy Spirit

Who became the first King of Israel?
Saul

What did Jeremiah warn the Israelites not to do?
Serve strange gods

What part of the Mass symbolizes our giving of our lives to God in the offering of bread and wine and the money we place in the basket?
Presentation of the Gifts

What does Jesus teach about worrying in Chapter 12?
Worrying shows a lack of trust in God.

When Solomon was given the chance to ask God for anything, what did he request?
The ability to lead Israel with Godly wisdom.

According to Ephesians, in what two ways are husbands to love their wives?
As Christ loves the church and as their own bodies (Ephesians 5:25, 28)

Under whom did Jesus suffer?
Under Pontius Pilate

What are the basic and necessary elements of the sacrament of Confirmation?
Anointing with oil and laying on of hands

The fundamental task of marriage and family is to be at the service of what?
Life

What did Salome ask for as a reward for dancing for Herod?
John the Baptist's head on a Plate

How many men did Jesus choose to follow him and lead the Church and what were they called?
12 Apostles

How is God's Word a "Living Word?"
God's teachings are timeless

What is something that is specially blessed and set aside for God called?
Consecrated

What did God do to the people of Babel?
Confused their language

Essentially what is the goal of Christian morality?
To live and love as Jesus did

What did the devil try to tempt Jesus to turn stones into?
Bread

What language was the New Testament originally written in?
Greek

What is our greatest prayer?
The Mass (The Holy Eucharist)

What do we call the avoidance of a particular kind of food as an act of penance or spiritual discipline; or the avoidance of meat on certain days?
Abstinence

Who guides us so we can know the truth of Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition?
The Magisterium

The state or condition in which the soul of a just person is purified after death so they can enter into everlasting happiness with God in heaven is called.....?
Purgatory

What four sacraments use oil in their celebration?
Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Orders, and Anointing of the Sick

Which book of the New Testament is categorized as a book of prophecy?
Revelation

Why did God allow Satan to take away Job's children, possessions, and health?
To show Satan that Job would still love Him

Which came first the Bible or the Catholic Church?
The Catholic Church

One of the Apostles was referred to as "doubting Thomas" because?
He said he would not believe Jesus rose from the dead unless he could put his hand in the side of Jesus, where the spear had pierced Him.

In marriage, what is the supreme gift given by God?
Children

What is the eighth commandment?
You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.

What hours of the day is the Angelus devotion traditionally recited?
6:00am, noon, and 6:00pm

What is the stemmed cup called that is used on the altar at Mass to hold the wine that is consecrated into the blood of Christ?
The Chalice.

Saint Mother Theresa of Calcutta is best known for her work with:
The poorest of the poor

When is the Mass of the Lord's Supper celebrated?
Holy Thursday

Name 3 of the six Holy Days of Obligation.
Christmas, December 25; Mary Mother of God, January 1; Ascension Thursday, 40 days after Easter; Assumption of Mary into Heaven, August 15; All Saints, November 1; Immaculate Conception, December 8

What is the name of the spiritual prayer which says certain prayers for nine days in a row?
Novena

In the Lord's Prayer, "Give us this day our daily bread," means that God satisfies what kind of hunger?
Physical and spiritual

Who was the prophet of the Old Testament who didn't want God to forgive the sinners of Nineveh?
Jonah

When are Catholics obligated to attend Mass?
Every Sunday and Holy Day of Obligation

What are the four liturgical colors the Church uses?
Purple, Green, White, and Red

What is the Source and Summit of our faith?
The Holy Eucharist

What is sin?
Any intentional thought, word, deed or omission that breaks God's law

What is the Hebrew word for teacher?
Rabbi

What is a common term in Catholicism used for the rounds of unleavened bread consecrated during Mass to become the real body of Christ.
Hosts

What is an essential part of the sacrament of Penance and Reconciliation?
To be sincerely sorry for our sins and have a firm intention not to continue to sin

What does the liturgical color of red signify?
Martyrs or the Holy Spirit

Those who die in a state of mortal sin go here.
Hell

What do we call words of hatred, reproach, or defiance spoken against God?
Blasphemy

What do we call the vessel into which the consecrated Host (Jesus) is placed during Eucharistic Adoration or Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament?
Monstrance

Mary is Mother of God and Mother of what?
The Church

Where do we find God's word to each of us?
In the Bible

What is used as a symbol of our prayers rising to God?
Incense

Who were the first to hear the "Word of God"?
Jewish people

Which saint created the first Christmas manger scene?
St. Francis of Assisi

The day that we honor the dead is observed on what date every year?
November 2

This prayer in the Mass is not sung during the seasons of Advent and Lent.
The Gloria

When Mary and Joseph found Jesus in the temple, what was he doing?
Teaching the Jewish leaders

What book of the bible would you read if you wanted to learn more about the Church when it first began?
Acts of the Apostles

What sacrament expects each of us to be involved in the life and mission of the Church?
Baptism

What feast day do we celebrate on the last day of the liturgical season?
Christ the King

Is it true or false: there are some big sins that cannot be forgiven in confession?
False

What do we call the liturgical season during which we try to change our hearts and become more like Jesus?
Lent

What sacrament makes God's life and love in us stronger?
Eucharist

What do we call the oil used at baptism?
Oil of catechumens

What special image of Jesus reminds us strongly that He always takes care of us and protects us?
The Good Shepherd

Who is the Promised One?
Jesus

Whose image are Adam and Eve created in?
God's

When Adam and Eve disobeyed God, He made them leave. What is the name of the place they left?
The Garden of Eden

The Holy Spirit descended upon Jesus' followers on the day of Pentecost. The day is known as what in the Church?
The birthday of the Church

How many days after Jesus was crucified did He rise from the dead?
Three

When do we celebrate Jesus' birthday?
Christmas/ December 25

What did Jesus come to do for us?
Save all people from their sins.

Who created Adam and Eve?
God, who created them in His own image.

On the day Jesus rose from the dead, who did Mary Magdalene go with to the tomb?
The other Mary.

What substance did God form man out of?
Man was formed out of clay according to Genesis 2, verse 7

From what Gospel writer are the Sunday readings taken for Year C?
Luke

What is the center of our life of prayer and worship?
The Mass

Name one of the Joyful Mysteries of the Rosary.
Annunciation, Visitation, Birth of Jesus, Presentation of Jesus in the Temple, Finding of Jesus in the Temple

Who guides the Church and each of us in making good moral decisions?
Holy Spirit

Who as a baby was placed in a basket among weeds so that the Egyptians would not harm him?
Moses

What do we call the liturgical season during which we prepare our hearts and homes to receive Jesus in a special way?
Advent

What do we call the day that Jesus died on the cross for us?
Good Friday

What do we call the prayer that begins with the words of St. Elizabeth?
Hail Mary

What do we call the set of teachings that Jesus gave to His disciples which describe how to live to be happy in the kingdom of God?
The Beatitudes

What prayer do we usually pray during the sacrament of Reconciliation?
The Act of Contrition

Which commandment is all about always telling the truth?
The eighth commandment: "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor."

What commandment asks us to always reverence the name of Jesus?
Second Commandment

According to Philippians 4:6 what should Christians do instead of worrying?
They should pray, bringing their requests to God.

In Psalm 150, who or what is instructed to praise God?
Everyone who has breath.

What two sacraments do we need to be healed?
Reconciliation and Anointing of the Sick

What are the Sacraments of mission or service?
Holy Orders and Marriage

There are two sacraments of initiation. True or false?
False. There are three: Baptism, Confirmation and Eucharist.

What words does the priest or deacon say when you are baptized?
I baptize you in the name of the Father, and the Son and of the Holy Spirit

What does the bishop say when you are confirmed?
Be sealed with the Gift of the Holy Spirit

How long must we fast before we receive communion?
One hour

How do we answer when the priest or special minister of the Eucharist says either "the Body of Christ"?
Amen

We cannot we receive the sacrament of Holy Communion with what kind of sin on our soul?
Mortal sin

Name 4 of the 12 fruits of the Holy Spirit.
Charity (Love), Kindness, Chastity, Modesty, Faithfulness, Patience, Generosity, Peace, Gentleness, Self Control, Goodness, Joy

What is the Church?
The Church is the People of God. It is the community of believers created by the Holy Spirit.

Name one place we find the Holy Spirit.
Scriptures; teaching of the Church through the popes and bishops; the Mass.

Who takes St. Peter's place as the leader of our Catholic Church on earth?
The Pope

What do we call the prayer prayed by a priest in the sacrament of Penance that is a sign of God's forgiveness?
Absolution

What do we call the days before Christmas when Christians wait and prepare for the coming of Jesus?
Advent

The Ascension is the Church feast that celebrates what?
Jesus returning to his Father forty days after his resurrection

What do we call a community of Catholics who worship and serve together under the leadership of a pastor?
A parish

What is the special title given to certain bishops by the pope to honor them and to make them part of his closest advisers?
Cardinals

What do we call a portion of the universal Church made up of a number of parishes in a certain area, led by a bishop?
Diocese